3 days in Hyderabad, first time in India
========================================
:date:`December, 7-11, 2014`

I'll be visiting our Indian partners in Hyderabad for the BGaL (Basal Ganglia at
Large) associated team:

Even if a lot remains to be done to understand the complexity of the brain
organization, we believe that the domain is mature enough, with
well-established models and well-recognized principles of information
processing, to attack a new aspect of numerical simulation, with the
implementation of neuronal models at a large scale.

|

Prospectom 2014
===============
:date:`November 20-21, 2014`

I've been invited to participate to the `prospectom
<http://prospectom.liglab.fr/atelier-2014/index.html>`_ workshop on
computational proteomics (large-scale study of proteins, particularly their
structures and functions) in order to work on new visualizations.

|

Antialiased 2D Grid, Marker, and Arrow Shaders
==============================================
:date:`November 1st, 2014`

.. image:: ../images/JCGT-3.png
   :scale: 75%
   :target: http://jcgt.org/published/0003/04/01/
   :class: img-left

**Abstract** Grids, markers, and arrows are important components in scientific
visualisation. Grids are widely used in scientific plots and help visually
locate data. Markers visualize individual points and aggregated data. Quiver
plots show vector fields, such as a velocity buffer, through regularly-placed
arrows. Being able to draw these components quickly is critical if one wants to
offer interactive visualisation. This article provides algorithms with GLSL
implementations for drawing grids, markers, and arrows using implicit surfaces
that make it possible quickly render pixel-perfect antialiased shapes.

Full article available from http://jcgt.org/published/0003/04/01/

|

How to dodge the pitfalls of bad illustrations
==============================================
:date:`September 24, 2014`

Nature `highlighted
<http://www.nature.com/news/how-to-draw-perfect-figures-1.15996>`_
the Ten Simple Rules article:

.. image:: ../images/Nature.jpg
   :scale: 50%
   :class: img-left

*Jumbled charts, misleading graphs, axes to nowhere — illustrations in a paper
can go wrong in many ways. Now, a treatise that attempts to rescue science
from bad figures has been getting rave reviews on social media. Researchers
have also been discussing a classic paper extolling the virtues of scientific
stupidity.*

See also `here <http://www.nature.com/news/how-to-dodge-the-pitfalls-of-bad-illustrations-1.15999>`_.

|

Ten Simple Rules for Better Figures
===================================
:date:`September 11, 2014`

.. image:: ../images/PLOS-logo.jpg
   :scale: 30%
   :class: img-left

Scientific visualization is classically defined as the process of graphically
displaying scientific data. However, this process is far from direct or
automatic. There are so many different ways to represent the same data: scatter
plots, linear plots, bar plots, and pie charts, to name just a
few. Furthermore, the same data, using the same type of plot, may be perceived
very differently depending on who is looking at the figure. A more accurate
definition for scientific visualization would be a graphical interface between
people and data. In this short article, we do not pretend to explain everything
about this interface; rather, see [1], [2] for introductory work. Instead we
aim to provide a basic set of rules to improve figure design and to explain
some of the common pitfalls.

More at `PLOS Computational Biology
<http://www.ploscompbiol.org/article/info:doi/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003833>`_
and `Nature <http://www.nature.com/news/how-to-dodge-the-pitfalls-of-bad-illustrations-1.15999>`_

|

Glumpy reboot !
===============
:date:`September 7, 2014`

.. image:: ../images/glumpy-teaser.png
   :scale: 75%
   :target: http://glumpy.github.io

|

Bernstein Conference
====================
:date:`September 2-5, 2014`

.. image:: ../images/bccn-logo.png
   :scale: 30%
   :class: img-left

I'll give an invited talk about cortical plasticity at the *Approaching
Cognition from the Computational Neuroscience perspective* satelite workshop of
the Bernstein Conference organized by Yulia Sandamirskaya.

The description of neuronal dynamics at the level of neural population activity
correlates most closely with signatures of cognitive processes in human
behavior. Indeed, this level of description seems to be privileged in achieving
an understanding of cognition, e.g. the processes behind attention,
habituation, or decision making, in neural terms. To move beyond mere
correlation, however, architectural models are needed that are based in
neuronal principles, but which also link to the sensory surfaces and the motor
processes to ground cognition and to generate overt behavior. Critically, both
neural and behavioral signatures of the process accounts must be identified and
made accessible to experimental observation.

A central issue in such a research program is to bring together constraints
that come from computational neuroscience and reflect the mechanistic
properties of neural populations and their dynamics with constraints that come
from cognitive science and define the central elements of cognition that neural
accounts must address.  Thus, the goal of the workshop is to illuminate the
problems in the interface between the computational neuroscience and cognitive
science and search for answers to the question: How can we achieve models,
which explain behavior and cognitive processes and remain neurally realistic?


|

GNU/Linux Mag Hors Série 73
===========================
:date:`July-August, 2014`

.. image:: ../images/gnulinux-magazine-hs-73.jpg
   :scale: 40%
   :class: img-left

I wrote an article (in French) about Matplotlib in the French Linux Mag
(Hors-Série 73) and Cyrille Rossant wrote an introduction to vispy in the same
magazine:

*L'un des innombrables intérêts de Python vient de la mise à disposition des
développeurs d’un nombre impressionnant de modules. Mais pour pouvoir les
utiliser, encore faut-il savoir qu'ils existent et comment ils fonctionnent...
Dans le domaine du calcul scientifique, il y a des modules qui sont très connus
tels que numpy, scipy ou encore matplotlib et d’autres qui le sont moins, mais
qui le mériteraient !  Par exemple, matplotlib n'est pas vraiment adapté à la
3D, alors que vispy, basé sur OpenGL, peut être bien plus performant dans ce
domaine...*

More `here <http://boutique.ed-diamond.com/gnulinux-magazine-hors-series/597-gnulinux-magazine-hs-73.html>`_

|

Structure of Receptive Fields ...
=================================
:date:`July 3, 2014`

| **Structure of Receptive Fields in a Computational Model of Area 3b of Primary Sensory Cortex**
| G. Is. Detorakis and N.P. Rougier, Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience (2014)

|

**Abstract** In a previous work, we introduced a computational model of area 3b
which is built upon the neural field theory and receives input from a
simplified model of the index distal finger pad populated by a random set of
touch receptors (Merkell cells). This model has been shown to be able to
self-organize following the random stimulation of the finger pad model and to
cope, to some extent, with cortical or skin lesions. The main hypothesis of the
model is that learning of skin representations occurs at the thalamo-cortical
level while cortico-cortical connections serve a stereotyped competition
mechanism that shapes the receptive fields. To further assess this hypothesis
and the validity of the model, we reproduced in this article the exact
experimental protocol of DiCarlo et al. that has been used to examine the
structure of receptive fields in area 3b of the primary somatosensory
cortex. Using the same analysis toolset, the model yields consistent results,
having most of the receptive fields to contain a single region of excitation
and one to several regions of inhibition. We further proceeded our study using
a dynamic competition that deeply influences the formation of the receptive
fields. We hypothesized this dynamic competition to correspond to some form of
somatosensory attention that may help to precisely shape the receptive
fields. To test this hypothesis, we designed a protocol where an arbitrary
region of interest is delineated on the index distal finger pad and we either
(1) instructed explicitly the model to attend to this region (simulating an
attentional signal) (2) preferentially trained the model on this region or (3)
combined the two aforementioned protocols simultaneously. Results tend to
confirm that dynamic competition leads to shrunken receptive fields and its
joint interaction with intensive training promotes a massive receptive fields
migration and shrinkage.

|

Cortical Plasticity, a Computational Approach
=============================================
:date:`June 16-18, 2014`

I'll give an invited talk at the `3rd International Conference on Neural Field
Theory
<http://outreach.eucognition.org/news/3rd-international-conference-neural-field-theory-icnft>`_
At the university of Reading.

We investigated the formation and maintenance of ordered topographic maps in the
primary somatosensory cortex as well as the reorganization of representations
after sensory deprivation or cortical lesion. We considered both the critical
period (postnatal) where representations are shaped and the post-critical
period where representations are maintained and possibly reorganized. We
hypothesise that feed-forward thalamocortical connections are an adequate site
of plasticity while cortico-cortical connections are believed to drive a
competitive mechanism that is critical for learning. We modeled a small skin
patch located on the distal phalangeal surface of a digit as a set of 256
Merkel ending complexes (MEC) that fed a computational model of the primary
somatosensory cortex (area 3b). This model is a two-dimensional neural field
where spatially localized solutions (a.k.a. bumps) drive cortical plasticity
through a Hebbian-like learning rule. Simulations explain the initial formation
of ordered representations following repetitive and random stimulations of the
skin patch. Skin lesions as well as cortical lesions are also studied and
results confirmed the possibility to reorganize representations using the same
learning rule and depending on the type of the lesion. For severe lesions, the
model suggests that cortico-cortical connections may play an important role in
complete recovery.

|

Round-table meeting
===================
:date:`June 14, 2014`

In the context of the `Futur en Seine festival
<http://www.futur-en-seine.fr/fens2014/>`_, I'll be present at the
`Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers <http://the.cnam.eu>`_ for a
`round-table meeting
<http://www.futur-en-seine.fr/fens2014/projet/numeriquement-votre/>`_ around
our digital society.

|

LoOPS Day (5th)
===============
:date:`June 12, 2014`

.. image:: ../images/loops.png
   :scale: 60%
   :class: img-left

I will give a `course on modern OpenGL
<http://reseau-loops.github.io/journee_2014_06.html>`_ with Cyrille Rossant at
the Orsay mathematic laboratory. **Canceled** (because of strikes) but the
tutorial material is available on `github
<https://github.com/rougier/loops-tutorial>`_ and `here
<http://www.labri.fr/perso/nrougier/teaching/opengl/>`_.

|

Biology of Decision Making
==========================
:date:`May 28-29, 2014`

We presented a poster at the `Fourth International Symposium on Biology of
Decision Making <http://sbdm2014.isir.upmc.fr>`_, Paris, France.

.. image:: ../images/ReproducibleScience.png
   :target: ../downloads/ReproducibleScience.pdf
   :scale: 60%
   :class: img-left  img-polaroid

In a previous modelling study, Leblois et al. (2006) demonstrated an action
selection mechanism in cortico-basal ganglia loops based on competition between
the positive feedback, direct pathway through the striatum and the negative
feedback, hyperdirect pathway through the subthalamic nucleus. In Guthrie et
al. (2013), authors investigated how multiple level action selection could be
performed by the basal ganglia. To do this, the model has been extended in a
manner consistent with known anatomy and electro-physiology in three main
areas. Unfortunately, the information provided by the article were not
sufficient to reproduce the model !!! If reproducibility is the hallmark of
Science, non-reproducibility seems to be the hallmark of Computational
Neurosciences. Guthrie et al. (2013) is a prototypic case of such non-
reproducible computational neuroscience research even though the proposed model
gives a fair account of decision making in the basal ganglia complex. While
trying to replicate results starting from the article description, we soon
realised some information were undisclosed, some other were ambiguous and there
were also some factual errors. Even after accessing the original sources (6000
lines of pascal), we were still unable to understand how the model worked. In
the end, only the original material (a binary executable) and a direct contact
with the authors allowed us to access the whole picture. After two months of
intensive refactoring, we were finally able to replicate results using only 200
lines of python.

|

6th Workshop of the Computational Neuroscience Network
======================================================
:date:`March 27-28, 2014`

I'll give an invited talk on cortical plasticity at the `6th Workshop of the
Computational Neuroscience Network <http://rncm2014.sciencesconf.org>`_ in
Marseille.

**Encoding and signal processing with neural assemblies**

* Analysis at the mesoscopic scale: cell assemblies and population coding
* Dynamic system approach, probabilistic inference and predictive coding
* Spike coding, rate coding and neural oscillations
* Plasticity mechanisms
* Large-scale brain connectivity

**Analysis at the large-scale level: brain areas and networks**

* Computational neuroimaging
* Connectivity analysis
* Information theory and graph theory applied to neuroimaging
* Neural oscillations

|

Forums des Sciences Cognitives (French)
=======================================
:date:`March 22, 2014`

I'll give a conference at the 13rd `Forums des Sciences Cognitives
<http://forumsciencescognitives.com>`_

.. image:: ../images/ForumSciencesCognitives-2014.jpg
   :target: http://forumsciencescognitives.com
   :scale: 60%
   :class: img-left

Les Sciences Cognitives, aux frontières de la psychologie cognitive, de la
philosophie et des neurosciences, ont mis en avant depuis plusieurs décennies,
la notion de cognition incarnée qui donne un rôle central au corps. Celui-ci
est en effet considéré comme le vecteur privilégié de l'expression de la
cognition mais aussi, et surtout, de sa construction. L'incarnation d'un
organisme définit et limite simultanément les processus cognitifs qui lui sont
accessibles. En ce sens, la cognition est ancrée très profondément dans le
corps et dans ses interactions avec le monde extérieur. Dans le cadre d'une
approche « systémique » de la cognition, il est donc important de comprendre
que de tels systèmes ne peuvent être vraiment appréhendés que comme un tout et
dans des situations comportementales naturelles. Or, pour le modélisateur, se
pose alors un problème quant à savoir son rôle dans l’interprétation de ses
modèles. Qu'est ce qui relève de l'observation objective et qu'est ce qui
relève de l'interprétation subjective en rapport à notre propre cognition et
donc à nos corps ? Au travers de la présentation de modèles issus des
neurosciences computationelles, nous essaierons de donner quelques pistes de
réflexions.

|

ERSF Code camp
==============
:date:`February 19-21, 2014`

.. image:: ../images/esrf-logo.jpg
   :scale: 60%
   :class: img-left

The first Vispy Code Camp will be held at the `European Synchrotron Radiation
Facility <http://www.esrf.eu>`_ in Grenoble, France, from Wednesday 19 to
Friday 21 February 2014.

All the core developers (Luke Campagnola, Almar Klein, Cyrille Rossant and
myself) and several other people from ESRF will participate. We plan to make
progress on the upcoming layers, bridging the gap between low-level OpenGL and
high-level interactive visualization. We want to achieve high performance on
big data without sacrificing ease of use and quality.

If you are interested in joining us, or if you just want us to discuss
a particular feature or use case, please feel free to contact us!

Finally, we would like to thank the organizers at ESRF for their
generous support.

|

Pinokio remake
==============
:date:`January 31, 2014`

.. image:: ../images/pinokio.jpg
   :scale: 40%
   :class: img-left

I've promoted and supervised (with Maxime Carrère et Grégoire Passault) a
remake of the pinokio project. Three students (Fabien Depraetre, Thibault
Lambert, Romain Sagean) started the project from scratch and designed, in 2
weeks, a low-cost Pixar-like animated lamp. You can make your own by following
instrutions at the `github repository
<https://github.com/rougier/PinokioProject>`_.

The overall cost (in material) is approximately 500$, mostly because of motors.

A movie is available from `here
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g_ZOmscoo0c&feature=youtu.be>`_

|

Summer School on Computational Neuroscience
===========================================
:date:`January 13-31, 2014`

I'll give a course on Reinforcement Learning at the `Latin-American Summer
School in Computational Neuroscience <http://www.laconeu.cl/>`_ to be held from
13 to 31 January 2014 in Valparaiso, Chile.

The principal aim of the 3rd Latin-American Summer School in Computational
Neuroscience is to promote in Latin America the field of Computational
Neuroscience through cutting edge mathematical and computational science tools
and its applications in Biomedical Research and Clinical Application. The
multidisciplinary study of brain function using neuroscience, mathematics and
computational approaches helps to a better understanding of brain
functionalities under normal or pathological states, as well as, to enhance
important advances in education, theoretical frameworks, brain imaging, and
biomedical therapies.

|
